# An Overview of Metaphysics

Welcome back to A Little Bit of Philosophy. This is Philosophy 101, Unit 3, Lecture 1: An Overview of Metaphysics. In this short video, we'll define metaphysics and introduce some of the more common problems addressed in this sub-discipline of academic philosophy. Now, this video is going to be a little bit longer than usual, so hold on; trust me, it gets better and better the further in we get. 

We've already discovered that by examining the etymology of the technical vocabulary in philosophy, we can learn a lot about the puzzles philosophers are trying to solve. Metaphysics, however, is a bit of an exception to the rule. The term is, like so many other technical words in philosophy, derived from a mash-up of ancient Greek words: in this case, the word *meta* and the word *phusis*. *Meta* is a preposition that can be translated "after" or "about", and the word *phusis* is adequately translated as "nature". So when we put them together, we get "about" or "after" nature. 

So from a purely lexicological perspective, we might expect metaphysics to be a branch of philosophy that investigates the natural world; perhaps metaphysics means the same thing as we mean by science today. Well, that wouldn't be correct. There is, of course, a relationship between metaphysics and science, as we'll see, but the terms are certainly not synonymous. Actually, the term is a somewhat accidental invention of the High Middle Ages. 

## The Origin of the Term

You see, it was during this period that the surviving works of the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle were reintroduced to the West. None of his published books survived the collapse of the Roman Empire, which is an entire other story in and of itself, but his journals and personal notes had been passed down through his followers and were eventually picked up and translated into Arabic. Probably around the 9th century of the Common Era—some 300 years later—European scholars (who at that time had only fragments of Aristotle's surviving work) began translating his works from newly available texts from the Islamic and Byzantine empires in the east. 

It was during this process that the word metaphysics was coined. You see, what survived of Aristotle's corpus was never meant to be published and lacked the organization and structure that one would expect from a book. So it was up to the translators and editors to decipher Aristotle's encyclopedic notes into coherent texts that could then be published as individual books. As they worked through the manuscript, they were adding titles based on the material in that particular section of the larger corpus: where his focus was on biology, they called it *On the Parts of Animals*; where he discussed the phenomena related to the weather, they labeled it *On Meteorology*; where he discussed the nature of political systems, they called it *The Politics*; and when he laid out his most un-Platonic theory of psychology, they titled it *On the Soul*. 

Now there was a section of material—very difficult to clearly define let alone to fully understand—which came after his material explaining motion and causation in the natural world (the *phusis*). So the editors ended up calling this section of material the *meta-phusis*: the material that follows the physics. That esoteric material became crucial to St. Thomas Aquinas's later synthesis of Aristotle and Christianity, and so the puzzles found in the metaphysics became a central theme in Western philosophy and have stubbornly remained there ever since. 

Now today, the word has two very different uses: one in popular culture and the other in academic philosophy. The popular usage of the term often refers to what might better be labeled occult or hidden knowledge, covering a wide variety of topics you can find gathered in New Age or popular bookstores under the heading of metaphysics. But in academic philosophy, the term is used to refer to what Aristotle himself might have called the "first principles" of philosophy, meaning the most fundamental questions that must be addressed if we're ever to make any serious progress in epistemology, or axiology, or even logic. 

If we wanted a bumper sticker definition of metaphysics, we might call it: the branch of philosophy that investigates the nature of reality, not as it appears, but as it actually is. It includes the investigation of what is, what could be but isn't, but also what could not possibly be. In other words, metaphysics in academic philosophy is an extremely broad and unfocused field of inquiry. 

Now there's really no tidy way to organize the multiple topics and problems that fall under the heading of metaphysics, so we're just going to introduce a few of the really big issues and try to get a flavor of what philosophical metaphysics is all about. 

## Ontology: The Study of Existence

We'll start with the investigation of existence itself. Ontology is literally attempting to give a rational explanation of what it means to be; that is, *onta* plus *logos*: the study of, or giving a rational explanation of, being. We might call it the study of "is-ness". 

You see, any phenomenon we observe or imagine must exist since it is a phenomenon. But what does it mean to exist? What is existence? What is its nature? Hamlet had it all wrong: "To be or not to be" isn't the question. We must first know what it means "to be", and only then can we hope to contemplate its contradiction. Everything that exists, insofar as it exists, has something in common: existence. But what is the nature of all that exists? Is there one kind of substance, some kind of stuff that distinguishes between that which is and that which is not? 

Now applying the reductivism of the pre-Socratic nature philosophers, is there a single kind of stuff that is the key to existence? Is there one common feature of all that which is? 

### Monism vs. Dualism vs. Pluralism

The monists believe that the answer is yes: there is a single substance, whatever you want to call it, and it is that one kind of stuff that marks the line between existence and non-existence. We can think of these philosophers as the "one-stuffers" because, out of all the diversity, the division, the difference that we see around us, there is one unifying substance that gives them all existence. But what is that stuff? Well, on this question, the monists divide into two main camps. 

The most popular view is called materialism, and the materialists argue that all there is, was, or ever will be, is composed of matter. Now what exactly matter itself is, is a far more difficult question which we'll set aside for now, but what it isn't is alive or complex. It is neither generated nor destroyed; it is that ultimate basic stuff that gives rise to complexity, both organic and inorganic. According to this ontological position, the universe, that is the set of all that is, is nothing more than matter and its absence. 

But not all monists are materialists. There are some that argue the single, properly basic stuff of reality is mind. Whether there's a single cosmic mind or a multiplicity of individual minds is a point of contention amongst what are called ontological idealists, but they all agree that the stuff of reality is mental in nature, not material. 

Now far more common is an ontological view that holds both mental and material stuff is properly basic. Everything that is can be reduced to one or the other of these two properly basic realities. Dualism is perhaps more common because it seems to align with how we think and talk about reality. For example, when we refer to our bodies we use the possessive: "this is my body", as if it were an object that belongs to me. If it is an object that belongs to me, then I must not be the same thing as my body. Hence, the mind and body cannot be the same kind of thing. Material bodies, living or not, are perceivable; they occupy space, have mass and other relational properties that are the proper domain of physical things. Mental entities on the other hand are conceivable, not perceivable, and they're free of the physical properties and limitations associated with material bodies. Dualists hold that both material and ideal things co-populate the universe, existing side by side, sometimes even intertwined together. 

But there's actually a third possible ontological view, claiming that there are multiple properly basic realities that combine together to form the cosmos. Though certainly less popular than monism or dualism in the Western philosophical tradition, there are some who hold that three or more properly basic kinds of stuff lie at the heart of all existence. So to recap, whether one thinks there is one, two, or a plurality of properly basic substances in the universe, ontology is the branch of metaphysics that explores the nature of existence, the stuff of reality, the substance of being. 

## Abstract Entities

Having now given the briefest of sketches of ontology (and trust me, there's a lot more we can say), we can move on now to another major area of focus in metaphysics: what we call abstract entities. Since the word "body" or even "thing" often carries materialistic baggage, we can instead adopt the term "entity" as an ontologically neutral term to refer to an existing thing. When we do that, we can conceptualize and talk about aspects of reality that might otherwise trap us unaware into particular ontological assumptions about the nature of reality. 

One such entity, central to philosophical analysis since at least Plato, is the universal. We can define a universal, in somewhat poetic language, as "the one that stands over the many". When we observe the world around us, we see an astonishing diversity of things. But on closer examination, we begin to see patterns, commonalities that allow us to organize the world. What allows us to perform this mental task is the recognition of that which all the particular things share in common. There are many different people, but they all share one common form or essence: being human. "Human" is the universal, while Bob is a particular human. Peppa the pig, and Henry the horse, and Wally the wasp are all particular individuals, but they all share in common being animals. And the same can be said for all the individual hats; they all share in "hatness". The universal is the one thing that all the particulars share in common: the one that stands over the many. 

Now that we understand the difference between the universal and the particular, we can think more carefully about the universals themselves. What kind of a thing or entity is a universal? Are universals merely ideas in our mind, or do they have an existence independent of minds? Realism is the view in metaphysics that holds that universals are mind-independent; that's to say their ontological status is independent of any particular thinker at any given time. Take numbers for example: do numbers only exist when someone is thinking about them, or do they exist regardless of whether they're being thought of? 

Let's imagine a time when there were no people around to think about numbers. Let's suppose that there are no thinkers at all at this moment in the universe. The ferns are growing, a brachiosaur is munching on the tops, and a taurosaur is grazing among the lower ones. Suddenly a predator charges into the clearing to have herself a snack. How many dinosaurs are there in the scene? There were two, then another came in. Wouldn't it be true, even if no one was around to think about it, that there would be three dinosaurs? If entities like numbers only exist in minds, and there are no minds at this time, then there couldn't be three dinosaurs. This is of course a silly example, but this is the kind of thought experiment that leads realists to claim that universals have a mind-independent ontological status: they exist regardless of whether anyone is thinking about them or not. 

Now nominalists, on the other hand, think that this is a bad argument and hold that universals have a mind-dependent ontological status. Universals are ideas, which are cognitions, which are mind-dependent. How could there be thoughts without minds? No minds, no thoughts. The debate between these two positions is of course much more complex than we've described it here, but this should at least help you get started in thinking about this particular puzzle. 

## Identity and Change

Another complex abstract entity or idea is actually a pair of phenomena that we find conjoined in the world. What is the nature of identity and change? 

For the moment, let's assume that the universe is not absolutely static, that change is possible. Now let's take this six-month-old baby as an example. Given the ordinary course of events and time, this baby will grow up to be a boy, then a young adult, and finally an adult. Let's call him Basil. Basil was a baby, then a boy, then a teen, and now he's a man. Basil has changed. He's not the baby, nor is he the child, nor is he the teen; he is himself. But wasn't he always himself? There's a sense in which Basil is the same, and then again there's a sense in which he's different. 

Now for now let's set aside the pesky question of his soul and concentrate instead on his body. Clearly, his body has changed over time, so 35-year-old Basil is clearly different from 6-month-old Basil. But the same would be true if we compared the 10-year-old to the 17-year-old Basil; at each stage he's different, and yet somehow he's also the same. So what is it that makes Basil, Basil? What is his identity? 

And even if we consider just 35-year-old Basil, we face the same dilemma: from moment to moment his body is changing, his blood is flowing, cells are dying and being replaced. He's moving through time and space; in fact, there are no two moments in which Basil is exactly the same. Does that mean that identity is really just an illusion? 

Now if we wanted to appeal to his mind or his soul, we're going to find exactly the same problem persists: at each stage of Basil's life his thinking is different. From moment to moment his thoughts are not identical to what they were the moment before, so there are no two states of Basil's mental life that are exactly the same, just as we found with his body. So does Basil exist at all? Is there a thing that is Basil that undergoes change, or is Basil just a label we place on a continuously changing set of states? And what about those individual states, do they even exist, and if so in what way? This is the problem of change and identity which metaphysics attempts to resolve. 

## Time and Space

Now considering the dual problem of identity and change brings us face to face with yet another deeply perplexing problem in metaphysics: time and space. 

What exactly is time? A clock, of course, is not time, but rather just a tool we use to measure it. So what exactly is time? In one sense, we can think of time as the progression of events in the universe. Thinking of it in this way, we can conceive of time as having a beginning but no end, but we could also think of it as being infinite bidirectionally. We could even think of it being cyclical or circular. But what exactly is time regardless of its direction? If it's no more than the observational difference between events, then it has no existence of its own, only the relational property of before and after events from a particular point of view. 

But this brings us to the corollary entity that turns out to be just as difficult to define: space. Events are the things that exist, the entities that are. Time and space are the distance between things that are. But why should we think of time and space as entities if they're just what lies between the things that are? If they aren't events in themselves, do they even exist at all? And if time and space aren't things in themselves, if they aren't events in the universe, if they don't exist, how can change in place, form, or time happen? 

So perhaps time and space are things after all. But if they are, what are they? Of course, various models have been put forward to try to account for what we observe as space and time, but none of them are able to give us a complete understanding of what they are in themselves. This is why metaphysicians as well as cosmologists struggle to fully grasp these perplexing entities. 

## Causation: Determinism vs. Indeterminism

Now if your brain is starting to hurt a bit, don't worry, that's supposed to happen. You can always pause the video and come back a little bit later. But if you feel up to it, strap yourself in, because what comes next is a real puzzler. 

Let's suppose for the sake of argument that things change. Let's also suppose that there is some explanation of time and space that helps make sense of the change that happens. That brings us to the relationships that exist between what came before and what comes after: causation. Causation is the idea of a relationship between the entities that make up the universe. 

Now when we consider the universe, well, that's a lot to consider. It's big, really really really big, and when we add up all the entities that exist—not just the ones we can observe—it gets even bigger. The universe is the set of everything that is: visible, invisible, material, immaterial, time, space, properties, relations, everything. The universe is the set of everything that is. It even contains all the things that could exist but don't. So let's agree that the universe is big. 

Now let's simplify things for a moment to set the stage for the next metaphysical puzzle we need to consider. There are lots of different entities that exist in the universe (remember an entity is just an existing thing) and we've accepted as a working hypothesis that things change. Let's call all these things that exist and change "events". So when we think of the universe, we can think of it as the set of all the events that are, were, and ever will be. 

Now the next question we have to face is "why?". Why do events happen? Either there's a reason or there isn't, but the fact that we can ask the question "why?" of any event seems to imply that there is a reason. There's some explanation of that event. That which explains an event is what we call its cause. Let's make it even more simple by considering one particular event in the universe. Robbie the toy robot is an event in the universe. Let's call it Event C. When this event happens, we want to know why it happened. What is it that caused Robbie to exist? What is the cause of this event? 

Now that question brings us to Sharon, the person who made Robbie. Since Sharon is the cause of Robbie, she must have existed before Robbie. That which precedes an event and is responsible for bringing it about is said to be the cause of the event. Causes precede effects. But isn't Sharon also an event in the universe? As such, we can reasonably ask why she exists, and of course, Sharon's parents are the cause of Sharon. This relationship between events, between cause and effect, is what we call the chain of causation. Sharon's parents are the cause of Sharon, and Sharon is the cause of Robbie. But what if Sharon's parents never met or never copulated? What would happen if we remove a link in the chain? If there were no cause of Sharon, then she wouldn't exist either, and neither would Robbie. 

Now we come to the big question: does every event in the universe have a cause that preceded it? Determinism is the view that claims that each and every event in the universe is preceded by some cause or set of causes that are responsible for bringing about that event. The cause of an event might be simple, or it might be complex, but the determinist hypothesis is that all events have a cause, or to put it negatively, there are no uncaused events in the universe. After all, if there were an event without a cause, there would be in principle no way of explaining that event. There would be no reason for that particular event to have happened, it would be literally inexplicable. 

What follows from this hypothesis is the most shocking realization of all. If every event has a cause, if there are no uncaused events, then every event that happens must happen exactly as it happens. Every event is necessary just as it is because its occurrence was preceded by a cause, which itself was preceded by a cause, and so on. Everything that happens in the universe must happen the way it happens precisely because it is part of the chain of causation. There are no uncaused events to break the chain. 

Now when we consider the implications of this conclusion, we discover many of our most cherished ideas about ourselves in the universe fall into serious question. 

I've been working on this video for you all day, and it's beginning to get to me. I need something to settle my mind, to put me at ease. I need a break. I've got it... what I really need is a cup of tea. So I get up, I go to the kitchen, and I get myself a cup of tea. But in doing so, I suddenly realized that if determinism is correct, I was always going to have been having this cup of tea. I was always going to have thought that I should have had one, and I was always going to have that thought because of my befuddled moment about how to communicate to you the idea of determinism. In fact, all of the events in my entire life have led me to this very cup of tea. And since the chain of causation is unbroken from my infancy to today, the idea that I decided on my own to get up and get a cup of tea is an illusion. The idea that I freely and without constraint decided to have this tea to calm my nerves is really an illusion. My decision to get a cup of tea was just part of the chain of causation that started long before I was ever born. And so it is with every other decision I have or will ever make; as events in the universe, my decisions are part of the chain of causation that links to events that occurred in the long distant past before me: before my parents, my grandparents, before humans, before the earth or solar system were even formed. 

Beyond realizing that my life is following a pattern established long ago, I also realized that my entire conception of moral and legal responsibility is now in jeopardy. The consequences of antisocial behavior, of law-breaking, of criminal malfeasance, seems inextricably tied to my ability to choose what I will and won't do. But if my will is part of the cosmic chain of causation, then my will is not free, and how can I be held accountable for actions that I was never free not to have done in the first place? 

This kind of problem is what motivates the alternative view of causation known as Indeterminism. We need some events in the universe to be free from the chain of causation. At the moment of decision, I need to be free from the chain to choose one action over another; that's what allows me to be responsible for the actions I undertake, and even more importantly, to be able to wag my finger at people whose actions I disapprove of. So perhaps there are some events, choices for example, that are uncaused events. When I feel that strange urge to get up and get something to satisfy my desire to be distracted from these difficult metaphysical questions, I freely choose to get up and go get a cup of tea instead of soda or water or coffee. My decision was unfettered by the great chain of causation; I am fully responsible for my getting the cup of tea. Sure, the events that occurred occurred as a procession of time, but the decision itself was uncaused. 

But as I think about this, if my choice really is uncaused, in what sense is it really my choice at all? Don't I want to be responsible for the decision? Wasn't the whole point to give me back my responsibility to choose or not to choose the tea, or to rob a bank for that matter? But if my decision is actually uncaused, how can I be the cause of that decision? If my choices are uncaused events in the world, I'm actually no more responsible for them than I would be if they were part of the chain of causation proposed by determinism. So it would seem that both views undermine our intuitive notion of personal responsibility. Determinism and indeterminism seem to leave my entire axiological views of responsibility in tatters. Perhaps I should think about something else for a while... 

## Philosophy of Mind

Now if the problem of causation is just too troubling to continue to consider, there are plenty of other metaphysical problems for us to entertain. The philosophy of mind is a major subfield of metaphysics that deals directly with the question of consciousness. 

Now I know that I'm conscious because I have direct access to my own consciousness. Of course, I don't know if there are any other consciousnesses in the universe because I don't have access to them, but since I am profoundly aware of my own, just as you are of yours, that's enough to say that the phenomenon exists. Now we can ask the philosophical question: what is it? To answer this question we'll need to refer back to our earlier conversation about ontology. 

Let's take the simplest hypothesis available: that ultimately there's only one kind of substance in the universe, and for the sake of argument, let's further suppose that that's matter. Now let's take the case of Mary. If Mary is a conscious being, and if we're supposing that mind is a material phenomenon, then we're really talking about Mary's brain. Mary's consciousness is really just the set of brain activities she's having at any given moment. Her mind, her soul, her consciousness is really nothing more than the total set of activities in her brain at any given moment. Of course, it follows from this hypothesis that if her brain dies, so does her consciousness. The end of the brain activity is the end of mental activity, and that's that. 

This materialistic picture leads to a rather depressing outcome, so what if we assumed that the mind was not just the brain? What if we adopt the dualist hypothesis that mental stuff is different from physical stuff? In that case, when Mary dies, her consciousness might seek out another body to inhabit. The transmigration of the soul, in this case reincarnation, would make it possible for Mary's consciousness to continue. But of course if this were the case, then Mary's consciousness wouldn't be hers anymore. Even more startling is the realization that if it can be in two different bodies, then it could be in any body. Further still, it could exist without any body at all. 

This opens up a whole load of questions that beg to be addressed. Why, if a soul can exist without a body, would it ever be in any body in the first place? If the mind and the brain are made of two completely different kinds of stuff, how do they interact? What are the causal mechanisms of mind-brain interaction? These are just a few of the perplexing questions addressed in the metaphysical sub-discipline the philosophy of mind. We'll have a video later on that deals with this in more detail.

## Philosophy of Religion

Now to wrap up this all-too-brief overview of philosophical metaphysics, let's introduce some problems associated with the idea of God. Yes, we've saved the best for last! 

Human beings have spent a great deal of time thinking and talking about God throughout our entire history; in fact, we've spent a good deal of time poking each other with sticks over the matter. So perhaps some rational thinking about God is called for. As by now you must expect, such an endeavor will begin with the most basic philosophical question: the "what is it?" question. If we're to make any progress getting clear on this topic, we need to make sure that we're all on the same page. So to avoid equivocation and ambiguity, it's essential for us to establish a clear definition of the nature of divinity itself. Beyond being immortal, what properties or qualities would be necessary in a being worthy of the title God? Defining exactly what we mean by God will, as we'll see in a later video, be more complicated than it might at first appear. 

However, once we've got a firm grasp on the concept of divinity, we can move on to the ontological question of God's existence. After all, it's one thing to know what God is, it's another matter entirely to know that God is. Answering this question has given rise to arguments both deductive and inductive. Some will attempt to show a necessary relationship between the idea of God and existence itself. Others will take a more empirical approach and attempt to infer the existence of God from the existence of other things. There's even an argument for God's existence derived from our moral awareness. 

Now if we're successful in either demonstrating or inferring the existence of God to some degree, we can move on to yet another vexing problem, which is God's relationship to everything else. It's commonly held that God is the cause of the universe, but this is really only one possible view. It might also be possible that God and the universe are the same thing, so that there's no causal relationship between God and everything else. There's even a view that holds that the universe, at least the visible part, is part of God, but that God's existence transcends the observable universe. 

Each of these different views proposes different answers to the problem of evil. If evil is a phenomenon that exists in the universe, why does it exist? Now these are just a few of the problems addressed in the sub-discipline of metaphysics that we call the philosophy of religion, which again we'll explore more thoroughly in another video.

## Summary

Now this absurdly brief overview of metaphysics has introduced some of the most perplexing problems that fall under the general subheading. Metaphysics broadly speaking can be considered an investigation into the nature of reality, as opposed to how reality appears. What really is? What are the most basic questions of philosophy that will in turn generate questions about epistemology, axiology, and logic? 

Ontology is the sub-branch of metaphysics that focuses on the nature of existence itself, while other topics such as time and causation fall under the generic heading of abstract entities. The subfield of the philosophy of mind explores the nature of consciousness, and the philosophy of religion (ill-named since it's not interested in religion at all) investigates the nature of divinity, the nature of God. 

Now in some upcoming videos we're going to take a deeper dive into the philosophy of religion and the philosophy of mind, but for now we need to wrap things up and say farewell to this all-too-brief overview of metaphysics. Come back again as we continue to explore A Little Bit of Philosophy.
